The reading is from the first book of Maccabees.
Then Judas and his brethren said,
Let us go up now to cleanse the holy places and to repair them.
And all the army assembled together, and they went up unto Mount Zion.
And they saw the sanctuary desolate, and the altar profaned, and the gates burnt, and shrubber drawing up in the courts as in a forest or on the mountains,
the chambers joining to the temple thrown down.
And they rent their garments and made great lamentation, put ashes on their heads.
And they fell face down on the ground on their faces.
And they sounded with the trumpets of alarm.
And they cried towards heaven.
Then Judas
appointed men to fight against them that were in the fortress, till they cleansed the holy places.
And he chose priests without blemish whose will was set upon the law of God.
And they cleansed the holy places and took away the stones that had been defiled into an unclean place.
And he considered about the altar of holocaust that had been profaned, what he should do with it.
And a good council came into their minds to pull it down, lest it should be a reproach to them, because the Gentiles had defiled it.
So they threw it down.
They laid up the stones and the mountains of the temple
in a convenient place till there should come a prophet and give answer concerning them.
Then they took whole stones according to the law and built a new altar according to the former.
And they built up the holy places and the things that were within the temple.
And they sanctified the temple
and its courts.
And they made new holy vessels and brought in the candlestick and the altar incense and the table into the temple.
And they put incense upon the altar and lighted up the lamps there upon the candlestick.
And they gave light into the temple.
And they set the loaves upon the table and hung up the veils and finished all the works they had begun to make.
And they rose up before the morning on the fifth and 20th day of the ninth month, which is the month of Casio in the 148th year.
And they offered sacrifice according to the law upon the new altar of holocaust, which they had made.
According to the time and according to the day wherein the heathens had defiled it, in the same was it dedicated anew with canticles and harps and roots and symbols
And all the people fell on their faces and adored and blessed up to heaven, him that had prospered them.
And they kept the dedication of the altar eight days and they offered holocausts with joy and sacrifices of salvation and praise.
And this is the word of the Lord.
Amen.
This is the beginning of the third day tonight, the beginning of the third day of the eight days of Hanukkah.
Hanukkah means dedication.
Ha is simply the, simply the article.
One article, ha.
Hanukkah, the dedication.
This feast is referred to in the Gospel of John.
as the winter feast, the dedication in the winter.
John describes Jesus going into the temple to celebrate Hanukkah.
Let me say some things.
There's so many things shrouding into my mind.
I haven't dared write any notes with this sermon.
I haven't dared, because my mind has been filled with it all week long.
If I take a tenth of what's in there, it'll be okay.
It was the right time.
Now suppose you were in the market for a house.
And the realtor takes you around to a house.
And it gives you the tour of the house.
And you go into the kitchen and you find a toilet.
Does this enhance the value of the house for you?
Or if you went to the bathroom and found a bedstead, the things are supposed to be in the right place.
Now, one of the richest roots of the Greek language is the verb temno.
It means to divide, but more specifically it means a dividing line.
this and not that.
When we do this and not that, we're copying what God did in creation.
The word in Hebrew is the participle is Mabdil to divide.
The very first day of creation, God divides
Light from darkness.
In other words, creation is at its root, binary.
And anybody ever challenges the binary nature of creation, regard that person as a spokesman for the devil.
Creation is binary.
Light and darkness.
As the week progresses, he separates the Hama'im from the Hayabasha.
He separates
the waters from the dry land.
He separates light and darkness, separates evening and morning.
He separates and draws lines between creatures that live there and creatures that live here.
And finally, at the summit of creation, male and female
He created them.
Nothing else.
In other words, God put divisions, lines of demarcation.
In Greek, the verb is temno.
Temno.
I wonder if I have time tonight to speak about this verb.
And I just used the word time, which comes from the verb temno.
Our English word time is derived
Because what is time is lines drawn.
Otherwise, it just runs together.
It's lines of division.
We live in an era, my brother and sisters, and I do not see any way that it can pass.
Honestly, at this point, I don't see that it will pass, but I will not.
If it does pass,
I will not live to see it.
But the fact that I see no way out of it suggests to me that these are the last times of confusion.
Confusion means to pour together.
Now there is sometimes when you want things poured together like in a mixed drink.
I mean slump people.
If the toilet is in the kitchen, if the bed is in the bathroom, and the laundry is in the living room, and the TV set is in the attic, things are not where they're supposed to be.
That's confusion.
Now, temno to divide.
We naturally draw lines of division
because they're required.
They're required for our sanity.
Among the word derived from the Greek temno is the Latin templum, temple.
You see, the supreme
division in this world, the highest division, is the consecration of space and the consecration of time.
That's what gives us the liturgical life, the consecration of space and the consecration of time.
I think I can safely ask for a show of hands
or any of you who have ever been to the consecration of an orthodox temple?
No, I'm not.
Nor myself.
You have.
What church was it?
St. George and Jacksonville, Florida.
It was actually consecrated.
It was built from the ground up.
That's right.
I can believe it changed St. George.
I've forgotten you were in Jacksonville.
St. George.
The last one I was in
was St. Andrews out in Riverside in California.
Father Josiah Trenum's Church.
But you were there for that consecration?
That's St. George.
Oh, that would be something.
I would love to be there for it.
Among the rituals, for example, is the spreading of chrism over the entire altar.
The whole altar is chrismated at places, 12 places down the course of the nave.
marked on the wall, they're consecrated.
We don't even aspire to that sort of thing anymore.
We will move church buildings around where the people are.
Rule number one for getting a church consecrated, it has to be paid for.
It can be no mortgage on the church.
Because it's there, it's there forever.
Till the end of time, it's there forever.
I don't even see this part of our thinking anymore.
I really don't.
There's more than one aspect of this.
The other aspect is we don't have here any fixed place.
We live in a tent.
We live in a chapel and we're on the move.
And that is also theologically quite valid.
The consecration of sacred spaces in the church took quite a while to develop.
The apostles didn't know anything about that, for example.
But later on with the time of constant time, you have this.
No.
The consecration of a temple is what we've been reading about tonight.
This consecration, I've read you the details from the fourth chapter of the Maccabees.
The consecration took place on December the 14th, 164 before Christ.
And I'm getting that date right out of Maccabees, just translating the times, because it gives you the date there.
in Maccabees.
It's sacred space, sacred time.
The temple is not just a place that's holy and consecrated to God.
It bears within itself all of the other
ways in which God dwells among men.
I've been reflecting that the feast that makes Hanukkah valid is Christmas itself, because Christmas is God entering into a temple.
God's presence among men.
Jesus compares himself in the Gospel of John when he's talking to the original apostles.
He compares himself to Bethel.
He says, you will see the Son of Man, angels ascending and descending on the Son of Man.
Bethel is one of the first consecrated places in the Bible.
But Jacob pours the oil on the stone.
This is the house of God.
We live, my brothers and sisters, we live in a time of tremendous desecration.
I think of how much of the current medical profession is given over to the mutilation of the human body.
That's a desecration of a temple.
When I think of all the foul things that have transpired in the world during this past year, that are desecrations.
I mean, some of them are quite notable, but it wasn't much covered in the press.
The fact that right by the tomb of St. Peter,
in St. Peter's Basilica in Rome.
They erected a statue of a Mesoamerican goddess, and the priests of that goddess stood there and sang hymns to that goddess right at the tomb of St. Peter, and in the presence of the current Bishop of Rome.
Father Aiden Nichols, his new book, Apologia,
He suggests that St. Peter's needs to be rededicated, purified and rededicated, that St. Peter's itself has been desecrated.
We orthodox have strong feelings about this because the chief temple of ours has been desecrated by the denial of Christ being turned into a mosque.
If history ever does sit itself right again,
that church will have to be purified and rededicated because it's been defiled because a different God is worshiped in Islam, a very different God is worshiped in Islam.
A God who says, I don't have a son cannot be the God we worship.
These are times that require radical commitment on which the Maccabees
serve as the models.
We are in a fight to the death.
It is clear in ways that has never been clear before that there is no fellowship between light and darkness.
And if the children of light are willing to make a compromise, I'm quite sure that children of darkness are not.
for ourselves as we fight.
Let us hold sacred the inner temple of our hearts and minds.
Look at the word temple.
They put a con on the front of it and a shun on the other end and you've got contemplation
Contemplation is the gazing at the glory of God in the temple.
This is what we need to be doing, intense lives of prayer and consecration of our hearts to the Lord.
Because the fight before us, the fight in which we are engaged,
is nowhere near the end, and the end we do not know.
But this is the destiny to which in our times God summons us.
Amen.
Homilies from All Saints with Father Pat Reardon, pastor of All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
This has been a presentation of Ancient Faith Radio.